Page 1:
Final Programmatic Environmental Impact Statement  South Region 
FirstNet Nationwide Public Safety Broadband Network Executive Summary 
August 2017 ES-3 
ES-1. INTRODUCTION 
Title VI of the Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012 (Public Law [Pub. L.] 
No. 112-96, Title VI, 126 Statute [Stat.] 156 (codified at 47 United States Code [U.S.C.] § 1401 
et seq.)) (the Act) created and authorized the First Responder Network Authority (FirstNet) to 
ensure the establishment of a nationwide public safety broadband network (NPSBN) based on a 
single, national network architecture (47 U.S.C. § 1422(b)).  FirstNet is an independent authority 
within the U.S. Department of Commerce’s National Telecommunications and Information 
Administration (NTIA). 
The NPSBN (i.e., the Proposed Action) is intended to cover all 50 states, five territories, and the 
District.  FirstNet has developed a series of five Final Programmatic Environmental Impact 
Statement (PEIS) documents, one for each of five geographic regions across the United States.  
This Final PEIS fulfills the requirements of the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) for 
the NPSBN for the South Region, which is composed of Alabama, Arkansas, Florida, Georgia, 
Kentucky, Louisiana, Mississippi, New Mexico, North Carolina, Oklahoma, South Carolina, 
Tennessee, and Texas. 
ES-1.1 FIRSTNET AND THE NEPA PROCESS 
The design, deployment, and operation of the NPSBN is a broad action with nationwide 
implications.  As a result, FirstNet has assessed potential impacts expected from the Proposed 
Action from the program as a whole.  As part of a tiered approach to NEPA (see NEPA 
§1502.20), this Final PEIS also supports any subsequent site-specific environmental analyses 
that may be required for individual actions for specific projects at specific locations, once they 
are identified. 
ES-1.2 FEDERAL AGENCY PARTICIPATION 
FirstNet is the lead agency for the environmental review consistent with NEPA, and the 
consultation requirements of the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA) Section 106 and the 
Endangered Species Act Section 7.  As the lead agency, FirstNet coordinates with cooperating 
agencies to ensure compliance with the laws, regulations, and Executive Orders (EOs) discussed 
in Section 1.8, Overview of Relevant Laws and Executive Orders. 
In letters dated January 16, 2015, FirstNet invited 37 federal agencies to participate in the 
development of the PEIS as cooperating agencies.  Nine agencies accepted the invitation: the 
NTIA, the Federal Communications Commission; the General Services Administration; the U.S. 
Department of Agriculture’s (USDA) Rural Utilities Service; the USDA’s U.S. Forest Service; 
the USDA’s Natural Resources Conservation Service; the U.S. Air Force; the U.S. Department 
of Energy; and the U.S. Department of Homeland Security, which includes the Federal 
Emergency Management Agency, the U.S. Coast Guard, and the U.S. Customs and Border 
Protection.  Appendix A contains a complete list of those agencies invited to become cooperating 
agencies.

Page 2:
Final Programmatic Environmental Impact Statement  South Region 
FirstNet Nationwide Public Safety Broadband Network Executive Summary 
August 2017 ES-4 
In a letter dated April 29, 2015, FirstNet invited all 56 state-level Single Points of Contact 
(SPOCs) to be consulting parties on the development of the PEISs to promote transparency and 
partnership.  As of the date of publication, 15 SPOCs have accepted the invitation, which 
afforded them the opportunity to review and comment on draft documents prior to public release. 
ES-1.3 PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT AND TRIBAL CONSULTATION 
Public comments on the Proposed Action have been and are being solicited as part of the NEPA 
process.  In addition, in response to its obligations under the NHPA, FirstNet has initiated 
consultations with the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation, State Historic Preservation 
Offices, federally recognized Native American tribes, and Native Hawaiian organizations.  
FirstNet anticipates consulting with Pacific Islanders on American Samoa, Guam, and the 
Northern Marina Islands as well as communities in Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands. 
In a letter dated January 30, 2015, FirstNet contacted tribal leaders and Tribal Historic 
Preservation Officers, where applicable, to initiate formal, government-to-government 
consultation with all 566 federally recognized Native American tribes.  In a subsequent letter 
dated May 15, 2015, FirstNet initiated consultation with 17 Native Hawaiian Organizations. 
The process for soliciting public comments on the Draft PEIS has primarily been achieved 
through the NEPA-mandated scoping processes (as described in Section 1.7.2, Scoping and 
Section 1.7.3, Draft PEIS Comment Period).  Public engagement via the scoping process began 
with publication of a Notice of Intent (NOI) in the Federal Register (FR) to prepare five 
coordinated PEISs (79 Federal Register 67156, [November 12, 2014]).  The NOI initiated a 45-
day public comment period, during which FirstNet received input from interested parties.   
Following the publication of the NOI, FirstNet held a series of public scoping meetings where 
participants had the opportunity to learn about the Proposed Action, talk directly with FirstNet 
environmental staff, and provide input regarding the scope and analysis of the Proposed Action.  
The public scoping meetings were held in the following locations:  
• Washington, DC: Tuesday, November 25, 2014 (4:00 – 8:00 p.m.) 
• Honolulu, HI: Tuesday, December 2, 2014 (4:00 – 8:00 p.m.) 
• San Francisco, CA: Thursday, December 4, 2014 (4:00 – 8:00 p.m.) 
• Tucson, AZ: Thursday, December 4, 2014 (4:00 – 8:00 p.m.)   
• Kansas City, MO: Tuesday, December 9, 2014 (4:00 – 8:00 p.m.)  
• New Orleans, LA: Thursday, December 11, 2014 (5:00 – 9:00 p.m.) 
• New York City, NY: Monday, December 15, 2014 (4:00 – 8:00 p.m.) 
The Scoping Summary Report may be found in Appendix B.  The following major items were 
identified during the scoping comment period and in public meetings: 
• Potential impacts of the NPSBN on sensitive natural resources; 
• Concerns regarding the impacts of tower placement on culturally and ecologically sensitive 
areas, such as Tumamoc Hill in Tucson, AZ; and 
• The impact of the NPSBN on existing public safety communications infrastructure and 
operations.

Page 3:
Final Programmatic Environmental Impact Statement  South Region 
FirstNet Nationwide Public Safety Broadband Network Executive Summary 
August 2017 ES-5 
FirstNet continued to accept comments after the close of the formal scoping period to allow the 
public as many opportunities as possible to provide input.  Additional comments were received 
on the topics mentioned above, as well as on the topic of potential impacts of radio frequency 
(RF) emissions.  
The Draft PEIS for the South Region was released on October 14, 2016 for a 60-day public 
comment period, via an announcement in the Federal Register (81 FR 71044) (Federal Register, 
2016).  During the comment period, FirstNet held a series of public meetings to provide the 
general public and interested stakeholders with an opportunity to learn about the PEIS, ask 
questions, and provide comments.  Meetings were held on the following dates and locations:  
• Nashville, Tennessee: October 24, 2016, from 4:00 p.m. to 8:00 p.m. 
• Atlanta, Georgia: October 25, 2016, from 4:00 p.m. to 8:00 p.m. 
• Frankfort, Kentucky: October 25, 2016, from 4:00 p.m. to 8:00 p.m. 
• Morrisville (Raleigh Area), North Carolina: October 26, 2016, from 4:00 p.m. to 8:00 p.m. 
• Montgomery, Alabama: October 26, 2016, from 4:00 p.m. to 8:00 p.m. 
• Orlando, Florida: October 27, 2016, from 4:00 p.m. to 8:00 p.m. 
• Columbia, South Carolina: October 27, 2016, from 4:00 p.m. to 8:00 p.m. 
• Baton Rouge, Louisiana: November 1, 2016, from 4:00 p.m. to 8:00 p.m. 
• Sante Fe, New Mexico: November 1, 2016, from 4:00 p.m. to 8:00 p.m. 
• Jackson Mississippi: November 2, 2016, from 4:00 p.m. to 8:00 p.m. 
• Little Rock, Arkansas: November 3, 2016, from 4:00 p.m. to 8:00 p.m. 
• Oklahoma City, Oklahoma: November 3, 2016, from 4:00 p.m. to 8:00 p.m. 
• Austin, Texas: November 7, 2016, from 4:00 p.m. to 8:00 p.m. 
• Dallas, Texas: November 9, 2016, from 4:00 p.m. to 8:00 p.m. 
Comments received focused primarily on issues such as potential impacts of radio frequency 
(RF) emissions, best management practices (BMPs), climate change impact assessment 
guidelines, vibration impacts, requests for consultation, and legal questions surrounding 
FirstNet’s network deployment procedures and future environmental compliance requirements. 
Appendix F details the comments received on the Draft PEIS and FirstNet’s responses.  Note 
that some comments arrived after the Final PEIS for the South Region was finalized.  Those 
additional comments and FirstNet’s responses can be found on an Errata Sheet located 
immediately before Chapter 1.  
ES-2. PURPOSE OF AND NEED FOR THE FIRSTNET PROPOSED 
ACTION 
The Act meets a long-standing and critical national infrastructure need to create a NPSBN that 
would, for the first time, allow police officers, firefighters, emergency medical service 
professionals, and other public safety officials to effectively communicate with each other across 
agencies and jurisdictions.

Page 4:
Final Programmatic Environmental Impact Statement  South Region 
FirstNet Nationwide Public Safety Broadband Network Executive Summary 
August 2017 ES-6 
ES-2.1 PURPOSE OF THE FIRSTNET PROPOSED ACTION 
The purpose of the Proposed Action is to design, deploy, and operate the NPSBN—a dedicated 
public safety communications network to provide first responders with the tools they need to do 
their jobs more effectively and to minimize the loss of life in the event of any future natural or 
manmade emergencies or disasters.  
The NPSBN intends to facilitate the use of rugged, easy-to-use devices and provide a set of 
applications and services on a single, interoperable platform built to open, non-proprietary, 
commercially available standards for emergency and daily public safety communications.  These 
applications and services are expected to enhance the ability of the public safety community to 
perform more reliably, effectively, and safely.  The NPSBN intends to also provide a backbone 
to allow for improved communications by carrying high-speed data, location information, 
images, and, eventually, streaming video.  This capability is expected to increase situational 
awareness during emergencies, thereby improving the ability of the public safety community to 
effectively engage and respond.   
The FirstNet network intends to be “hardened” in terms of physical structure, user access, and 
cyber security considerations.  These efforts would be designed not only to ensure that the 
network has greater resistance to system failure than what is currently available, but also that it 
can recover more rapidly should failure occur at any point in the system.  The goal would be to 
provide not only interoperability, but also improved operability in the event of a natural or 
manmade disaster.  The network operating standards are expected to also provide local control to 
public safety agencies, allowing for more control over the configuration, deployment, and 
management of multiple types of Information Technology resources, referred to as provisioning, 
as well as device features and reporting. 
ES-2.2 NEED FOR THE FIRSTNET PROPOSED ACTION 
The Proposed Action is needed to address existing deficiencies in public safety communications 
interoperability, durability, and resiliency that have been highlighted in recent years for the ways 
in which they have hindered response activities in high profile natural and manmade disasters.  
Today, first responders rely on numerous separate, often incompatible, and often proprietary land 
mobile radio networks.  This makes it difficult, and at times impossible, for emergency 
responders from different jurisdictions to communicate, especially during major emergencies 
that require a multi-jurisdictional response (National Task Force on Interoperability, 2005).  
The lack of interoperability in public safety communications and the hazards associated with it 
have been known within the public safety community and the telecommunications industry for 
quite some time.  A 1996 report on the state of public safety wireless communications identified 
interoperability issues that hampered emergency response activities in the 1993 World Trade 
Center bombing in New York City and the 1995 bombing of the Alfred P. Murrah Federal 
Building in Oklahoma City (Public Safety Wireless Advisory Committee, 1996).

Page 5:
Final Programmatic Environmental Impact Statement  South Region 
FirstNet Nationwide Public Safety Broadband Network Executive Summary 
August 2017 ES-7 
Interoperability problems arose again during the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, the 
event that marks the true genesis of the NPSBN.  As numerous onsite reports from public safety 
personnel at the World Trade Center, the Pentagon, and Somerset County, Pennsylvania, 
indicated, the lack of interoperable and resilient communications capability among the multiple 
police, fire, and emergency medical services personnel hampered rescue efforts and in many 
cases likely led to an increased loss of life, both among members of the public, as well as within 
the first responder community itself.  Indeed, hundreds of police officers and fire fighters, 
including off-duty personnel who reported to the scene to engage in rescue efforts upon learning 
of the events that were unfolding, lost their lives in the line of duty; this amounted to the largest 
loss of first responders in a single event anywhere in U.S. history (National Commission on 
Terrorist Attacks upon the United States, 2004). 
Subsequent disasters, such as Hurricane Katrina in 2005 and Hurricane Sandy in 2013, have 
shown that public safety response is still often compromised by an inability of public safety to 
communicate with each other due to radio systems operating on different, incompatible 
frequencies.  This is largely the result of the fragmented initial design and upgrades of public 
safety communications that were often planned and executed at the local level.  These disasters, 
along with the preceding terrorist events, demonstrated that the nation lacked an overarching 
plan to connect all first responders under one dedicated interoperable system. 
ES-3. THE PROPOSED ACTION AND ALTERNATIVES  
The Proposed Action would encompass the design, deployment, and operation of the NPSBN by 
FirstNet and/or a partner organization(s).  By statute, the network must have several 
characteristics, including: 
• Security, resiliency, backwards compatibility with existing commercial networks, integration 
with public safety answering points1 or their equivalents; 
• Substantial rural coverage;  
• Deployment that adheres to open, non-proprietary, commercially available standards; and  
• Use of existing infrastructure to the maximum extent economically desirable. 
The FirstNet network would have two components: the core network and the radio access 
network (RAN).  The core network is a key component for ensuring that users have a single 
interoperable platform nationwide, and would consist of a wide range of telecommunications 
infrastructure including fiber optic cable, towers, data centers, microwave technology, and 
others.  The RAN would consist of all radio base station infrastructure that would connect user 
devices. 
FirstNet intends to also maintain and improve the NPSBN to account for new and evolving 
technologies.  In particular, the FirstNet network would be based on the minimum technical 
requirements on the commercial standards for Long Term Evolution (LTE) service, an 
upgradeable technology now in its fourth generation (4G).  
                                                 
1 Public safety answering points are call centers responsible for answering calls to an emergency telephone number for police, 
fire, and emergency medical services.

Page 6:
Final Programmatic Environmental Impact Statement  South Region 
FirstNet Nationwide Public Safety Broadband Network Executive Summary 
August 2017 ES-8 
In accordance with NEPA, FirstNet must examine a range of reasonable alternatives to design, 
construct, and operate the NPSBN.  These alternatives must be reasonable ways in which 
FirstNet could meet the purpose and need for the Proposed Action.  In addition to the range of 
reasonable alternatives, FirstNet is also required to “include the alternative of no action” as part 
of the alternatives analysis in the PEIS.  The “No Action Alternative” describes what would 
happen if FirstNet did not construct the NPSBN, and is used as a baseline against which the 
potential impacts of the action alternatives can be compared (see NEPA §1502.14). 
In addition to the alternatives described below, other alternatives were considered but not carried 
forward.  Those alternatives are discussed in Section 2.3 of the Final PEIS, Alternatives 
Considered but not Carried Forward. 
ES-3.1 PREFERRED ALTERNATIVE 
Under the Preferred Alternative, FirstNet and/or its partners would construct a nationwide 
broadband LTE network using a combination of the wired, wireless, deployable, and satellite 
technologies.  There is currently a wide range of technologies that FirstNet may use to 
implement and deploy the NPSBN.  Table ES3-1 summarizes the types of wired, wireless, and 
deployable projects that FirstNet may consider.  Further details on NPSBN projects are provided 
in Section 2.1.2, Proposed Action Infrastructure. 
Table ES3-1: Proposed Action Infrastructure Types 
Project Type Description 
Wired Projects 
New Build – Buried Fiber 
Optic Plant 
Plowing or trenching cable and/or cable conduit within public or (where 
necessary) private road, utility, or other rights-of-way (ROWs) or easements, 
along with new points of presence (POPs)a, huts, or other facilities.   
Use of Existing Conduit – 
New Buried Fiber Optic 
Plant 
Installation of new fiber optic cable in existing, buried conduit.  Ground 
disturbance would usually be limited to existing conduit entry and exit points.   
New Build – Aerial Fiber 
Optic Plant 
Installation of new poles with new cables in previously disturbed or new ROWs 
or easements, or installing replacement poles in an existing ROW.  Deployment 
may include new access roads, POPs, huts, or other facilities to house plant 
equipment.   
Collocation on Existing 
Aerial Fiber Optic Plant 
Installation of new fiber optic cable on existing poles.  This may require 
structural hardening or reinforcement, and/or pole replacement.   
Use of Existing Buried or 
Aerial Fiber Optic Plant or 
Existing Submarine Cable 
Activation of existing unused (dark) fiber.  Deployment may require the 
installation of new equipment, usually in existing equipment huts.   
New Build – Submarine 
Fiber Optic Plant 
Installation of sealed cables in limited near-shore or inland bodies of water, along 
with new onshore landings and facilities to accept cable, which are typically 
buried close to shore. 
Installation of Optical 
Transmission or Centralized 
Transmission Equipment 
Installation of equipment as part of the core network deployment.  This 
equipment is usually installed in small boxes or huts in the ROW of the utility 
corridor, and may involve construction of access roads.

Page 7:
Final Programmatic Environmental Impact Statement  South Region 
FirstNet Nationwide Public Safety Broadband Network Executive Summary 
August 2017 ES-9 
Wireless Projects 
New Wireless 
Communication Towers 
Installation of new towers, antennas, and/or microwave dishes to support 
wireless infrastructure, along with generators, equipment sheds, fencing, lighting, 
electrical feeds, concrete foundations and pads, and/or access roads. 
Collocation on Existing 
Wireless Tower, Structure, or 
Building 
Mounting or installation of equipment such as antennas or microwave dishes on 
existing towers, along with power units in some cases.  Existing towers, 
structures, or buildings may require structural hardening or increased physical 
security measures.   
Deployable Technologies 
(Technologies intended to provide service in areas where permanent, fixed infrastructure cannot or will not be 
deployed) 
Cell on Wheels (COW) 
A cellular base station on a trailer with an expandable antenna mast, designed to 
be part of a cellular network and augment existing capacity.  COWs typically 
include a small generator and microwave or satellite link.   
Cell on Light Truck (COLT) 
A cellular base station on a light truck platform with an expandable antenna 
mast, designed to be part of a cellular network and augment existing capacity.  
COLTs typically contain a small generator and microwave or satellite link.   
System on Wheels (SOW) 
A full base station and controller on a large towable trailer or truck, with a large 
antenna mast, suitable to address larger localized coverage or capacity shortages 
in the event of large incidents.  A SOW can support an island system with no 
need for satellite/microwave link back, and typically includes a generator. 
Deployable Aerial 
Communications 
Architecture (DACA) 
Aerial vehicles such as drones, piloted aircraft, weather balloons, and blimps 
deployed at varying altitudes, capable of providing wide-area coverage, although 
with relatively low capacity/throughput.  DACA would be generally used for 
addressing wide-scale loss of coverage after a major catastrophic event.   
Satellite Technologies 
Satellite-Enabled Devices 
and Equipment 
Installation of permanent equipment on existing structures or the use of portable 
devices that use satellite technology, such as satellite phones or video cameras.   
Deployment of Satellites 
FirstNet does not anticipate launching satellites as part of the deployment of the 
NPSBN; however, it could include equipment on satellites that are already being 
launched for other purposes. 
a  POPs are connections or access points between two different networks, or different components of one network. 
ES-3.2 DEPLOYABLE TECHNOLOGIES ALTERNATIVE 
Under the Deployable Technologies Alternative, FirstNet would procure, deploy, and maintain a 
nationwide fleet of mobile communications systems, including ground-based and aerial 
deployable technologies, to provide temporary coverage in areas not covered by existing, usable 
infrastructure.  This alternative is evaluated as a stand-alone alternative and would not involve 
collocations of other equipment or construction of facilities, although some staging or landing 
areas (depending on the type of technology) could require minor construction and maintenance 
within public road ROWs and utility corridors, heavy equipment movement, and minor 
excavation and paving near public roads.  Generally, these units would be deployed at times of 
an incident to the affected area for either planned or unplanned incidents or events.  Equipment 
would likely be stationed in every state and territory, often at multiple locations in each state or 
territory, to facilitate rapid response.  These mobile communication units would be temporarily 
installed and may use existing satellite, microwave, or radio systems for backhaul.

Page 8:
Final Programmatic Environmental Impact Statement  South Region 
FirstNet Nationwide Public Safety Broadband Network Executive Summary 
August 2017 ES-10 
ES-3.3 NO ACTION ALTERNATIVE 
Under the No Action Alternative, the NPSBN would not be constructed; there would be no 
nationwide, coordinated system dedicated to public safety interoperable communications.  The 
existing multiplicity of communications networks would remain in place, as would the current, 
known limitations and problems of existing communication networks during times of emergency 
or disaster.  This alternative would require an act of Congress to revise the Act, which currently 
requires the NPSBN. 
ES-4. SOUTH REGION – AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT 
The FirstNet South Region is composed of 13 states: Alabama, Arkansas, Florida, Georgia, 
Kentucky, Louisiana, Mississippi, New Mexico, North Carolina, Oklahoma, South Carolina, 
Tennessee, and Texas.  As depicted in Figure ES4-1, the northern border of the South Region is 
the Great Plains and Midwest states, as well as the East Region states.  The western border is 
Arizona, the southern border is Mexico and the Gulf of Mexico, and the eastern border is the 
Atlantic Ocean. 
The South Region covers 26 percent of the U.S. landmass (U.S. Census Bureau, 2015a) and is 
home to approximately 46 percent of the total U.S. population (U.S. Census Bureau, 2012) (U.S. 
Census Bureau, 2015c).  Three of the 20 largest U.S. Metropolitan Statistical Areas are in this 
region: Dallas-Fort Worth-Arlington, TX (#4), Houston-The Woodlands-Sugar Land, TX (#4), 
Atlanta-Sandy Springs-Roswell, GA (#9).  These metropolitan areas have a total population of 
approximately 19.4 million people, which is approximately 19 percent of the South Region and 6 
percent of the total U.S. population (U.S. Census Bureau, 2015b).  Until the 1900’s most of the 
economy of the South region was based on agriculture.  Following World War II, there were 
large population shifts and industrialization and other development throughout the region 
(Scranton, 2002). 
Due to its topography and proximity to Atlantic Ocean and Gulf of Mexico, as well as extensive 
development in floodplains and lowlands, the South Region is particularly susceptible to storm 
events (including hurricanes) and flooding (Fenneman, N., 1916), which shapes the landscape 
and presents risks to infrastructure and human health and safety.

Page 9:
Final Programmatic Environmental Impact Statement  South Region 
FirstNet Nationwide Public Safety Broadband Network Executive Summary 
August 2017 ES-11 
 
Figure ES4-1: FirstNet PEIS Regions of Analysis 
ES-5. POTENTIAL IMPACTS OF THE PREFERRED ALTERNATIVE 
This Final PEIS contains 22 stand-alone chapters – one chapter for each state and other chapters 
with analyses and additional information as required by NEPA.  Each state-specific chapter 
discusses 15 separate resource areas, such as biological resources, water resources, land use, air 
quality, etc.  For each resource area, the Final PEIS provides an overview of the Affected 
Environment (i.e., existing conditions), and then discusses the potential impacts of the Preferred 
Alternative in an Environmental Consequences section. 
Through the programmatic approach, FirstNet has identified four categories of potential impacts 
on the resource areas: 
• Potentially significant; 
• Less than significant with Best Management Practices (BMPs) and mitigation measures 
incorporated; 
• Less than significant; and 
• No impact. 
The specific methodology used to determine these impact levels and thresholds of significance is 
provided for each resource within each state.  The sections below summarize in tabular form the 
impact categories for each potential impact type, within each resource, and within each state.  
For ease of reference, each impact category is assigned a color and a corresponding number, as 
shown below: 
1. Potentially significant 
2. Less than significant with BMPs and mitigations measures incorporated 
3. Less than significant 
4. No impact 
NA: Not Applicable.  White (no color) indicates resource not present in state(s)

Page 10:
Final Programmatic Environmental Impact Statement  South Region 
FirstNet Nationwide Public Safety Broadband Network Executive Summary 
August 2017 ES-12 
The sections below discuss the potential impacts of the Preferred Alternative, focusing on 
potential impacts and only certain proposed BMPs or mitigation measures, which are offered as 
examples.  Potential impacts associated with the Deployable Technology Alternative are 
discussed in Section ES-7.1 (below). The main body of the Final PEIS describes the potential 
impacts in greater detail, as well as BMPs or mitigation measures that could be implemented by 
FirstNet and/or its partners, as appropriate and feasible. 
Please note that this impact analysis is “programmatic” which means it evaluates the potential 
impacts over a broad area and does not evaluate the potential impacts associated with specific 
sites or locations. In some cases, additional site-specific analysis may be required depending on 
site conditions, the type of deployment, or any other permits or permissions necessary to perform 
the work.  
ES-5.1 INFRASTRUCTURE 
Infrastructure consists of the systems and physical structures that enable a population in a 
specified area to function.  Infrastructure is entirely manmade with a high correlation between 
the type and extent of infrastructure and the degree to which an area is characterized as 
“developed.”  Infrastructure includes a broad array of facilities such as utility systems, streets 
and highways, railroads, airports, buildings and structures, ports, harbors, and other manmade 
facilities.  Individuals, businesses, government entities, and virtually all relationships between 
these groups depend on infrastructure for their most basic needs, as well as for critical and 
advanced needs (e.g., emergency response, health care, and telecommunications).   
This section describes potential impacts to infrastructure including transportation, 
communications, and other utilities, associated with deployment and operation of the Preferred 
Alternative, and discusses some BMPs and mitigation measures that could avoid or minimize 
those potential impacts (see Table ES5-1).  Potential impacts associated with the Deployable 
Technology Alternative are discussed in Section ES-7.1 (below). 
Summary of Impacts 
Deployment and operation of the Preferred Alternative could potentially impact transportation 
system safety and capacity through the creation of traffic congestion or delay (e.g., lane 
closures), or result in the increase in transportation incidents (e.g., crashes, derailments) due to 
the transport of heavy equipment or deployment activities including plowing, directional boring, 
and trenching along roadways and within the public road ROWs.  The presence of deployable 
technologies such as COWs, COLTs, SOWs, and Deployable Aerial Communications 
Architecture has the potential to impact air and land-based traffic congestion and safety.  
Submarine deployment activities in limited near-shore or inland bodies of water additionally 
have the potential to increase boat traffic and congestion on a short-term basis.  These potential 
impacts to transportation capacity and safety would be less than significant, as they would likely 
be short term, would be regionally based around the ongoing phase of deployment, and would 
return to normal conditions after a few months or less.

Page 11:
Final Programmatic Environmental Impact Statement  South Region 
FirstNet Nationwide Public Safety Broadband Network Executive Summary 
August 2017 ES-13 
While potential impacts to health care and emergency health care systems are not certain, if they 
occurred as a result of deployment, these potential impacts would be localized, short-term, and 
temporary and therefore less than significant.  Any potential localized or temporary access 
restrictions to, or strains on, health care and emergency health services would likely improve 
during the operations phase of the Preferred Alternative. 
Effects on commercial telecommunication systems, communications, or level of service would 
be less than significant due to deployment activities that could generate temporary and minor 
disruptions to the current commercial telecommunications system.  Minor decreased level of 
service could occur during deployment of the Preferred Alternative and during implementation 
of deployable technologies.  Such deployment activities include plowing, directional boring, or 
trenching during the installation of fiber optic cable, as well as construction of wireless towers, 
structures, and buildings.  Potential impacts to underwater telecommunications infrastructure 
would also be less than significant due to submarine deployment activities in limited near-shore 
or inland bodies of water.  During operations, the new NPSBN is anticipated to improve 
commercial telecommunication systems, communications, and level of service by expanding 
telecommunications service areas.  
Potential impacts to utilities during system deployment would be less than significant.  Such 
potential impacts, if they occurred, would likely be temporary and minor. 
Implementation of FirstNet public safety telecommunications infrastructure would likely 
significantly improve public safety communications capabilities and response times in both 
urban and rural areas during operations.  Upgrades to the current infrastructure during the 
deployment phase could result in a temporary, likely minor disruption in emergency 
communications, generally lasting only as long as it takes to connect and begin using the new 
system.  It is anticipated that public safety communications interoperability, durability, and 
resiliency would significantly improve during operation in comparison to existing conditions. 
Although the individual states within the South Region each have some specific infrastructure 
characteristics, as documented in the Final PEIS, the South Region as a whole demonstrates 
characteristics of infrastructure common in the United States, and potential impacts would be 
similar throughout the region.  Overall, the Preferred Alternative would have less than 
significant, and oftentimes beneficial or positive, impact on existing and future infrastructure 
throughout the South Region.  The Preferred Alternative would create improvements in overall 
communications and response times, in both urban and rural areas across the region, and existing 
deficiencies would be addressed in public safety communications interoperability, durability, and 
resiliency.  As a result, the general effects on existing infrastructure and public safety in the 
South Region would be considered less than significant (see Table ES5-1).

